covered action in Chile 1963 to 1973
appendix chronology Chile 1962 to 1975
1962 special group approves $50,000 to
strengthen Christian Democratic Party
PDC subsequently approved an additional
one hundred and eighty thousand dollars
to strengthen PDC and its leader eduardo
frei 1963 special group approves twenty
thousand dollars for a leader of the
radical party PR later approved an
additional thirty thousand dollars to
support PR candidates in april municipal
elections april eight municipal election
results show PDC has replaced the are as
chilis largest party 1964 april special
group approves three million dollars to
ensure election of ptc candidate eduardo
frei may special group approves 160
thousand dollars to support pd seen slum
dwellers and peasant organizations
September fourth eduardo frei elected
president with 55 dot seven percent of
the vote october second ralph a dungan
appointed US ambassador to chile 1965
303 committee approves 175,000 dollars
to assist selected candidates in the
congressional elections march 7th pd c
wins absolute majority in Chamber of
Deputies becomes largest body in Senate
November 15 Sam Roth our agenda in an
interview reported in the New York Times
suggests the US was among certain
outside forces that had caused his
defeat in 1964 presidential election
1967 june sixteenth edward and Cory
replaces Ralph a dungan as US ambassador
to Chile 303 committee approves 30
thousand dollars to strengthen a faction
of the radical body 1968 July 12 303
committee approves 350 thousand dollars
to assist selected candidates in March
1969 congressional elections 1969 march
first congressional elections reflect an
increase in support for the National
Party and are resulting loss in
Christian Democratic strength April
fifteenth at a meeting of the 303
committee the question is raised as to
whether anything should be done with
regard to the September 1970
presidential election in Chile the CIA
representative pointed out that an
election operation would not be
effective unless an early enough start
was made October 21st Army unit
stationed in Tecna chilla revolt
ostensibly for the purposes of dermot
eyes in the military's demand for higher
pay the revolt engineered by General
Robert of yugs is widely interpreted as
an abortive coop 1970 March twenty fifth
40 committee approves 125 thousand
dollars for a spoiling operation against
again the popular unity coalition you
ping Jun the possibility of an agenda
victory in Chile is raised at an itt
Board of Directors meeting John McCone
former CIA director and at the time a
consultant to the agency and a director
of itt subsequently holds a number of
conversations regardless chili with
Richard Helms the current CIA director
jun 27th 40 committee approves $300,000
for additional anti agenda propaganda
operations July sixteenth John McCone
arranged for William bro CIA to talk
with her al janine itt bro tells Janine
that CIA cannot disperse itt funds but
promised to advise itt on how to channel
its own funds itt later passes 350
thousand dollars
the alessandra campaign through an
intermediary agus 18th national security
study memorandum and SS m 97 is reviewed
by the interdepartmental group the group
considers options ranging from efforts
to foreign amicable relations with
agenda to a position to him September
4th salvador allende wins 36.3 percent
of the vote in the presidential election
final outcome is dependent on october
twenty fourth vote in Congress between
agenda and the runner-up Jorge
alessandri who received 35.3 percent of
the vote agendas margin of victory was
39 thousand votes out of a total of
three million votes cast in the election
September 8 and 14 40 committee
discusses Chilean situation the
committee approves $250,000 for the use
of ambassador Corey to influence the
October 24 Congressional vote September
ninth Harold Janine ITT's chief
executive officer tells John McCone at
an itt Board of Directors meeting in New
York that he is prepared to put up as
much as 1 million for the purpose of
assisting any government plan designed
to form a coalition in the Chilean
Congress to stop again d mikone agrees
to communicate this proposal to high
Washington officials amid several days
later with Henry Kissinger and Richard
Helms Maccon does not receive a response
from either man September 15 President
Nixon instruct CIA director Helms to
prevent agendas ascension to office the
CIA is to play a direct role in
organizing a military coup de tat this
involvement comes to be known as track
to September 16th at an off-the-record
White House press briefing Henry
Kissinger warns that the election of
agenda would be irreversible might
affect neighboring nations and would
pose massive problems for the US and
latin america September 29 a CI official
at the instruction of Richard Helms me
with a representative of itt the CIA
officer proposes a plan to accelerate
economic disorder in Chile IDT rejects
the proposal October CIA contacts
Chilean military conspirators following
a White House meeting CIA attempts to
diffuse plot by retired general diox--
but still to generate maximum pressure
to overthrow agenda by coop see I
provides teargas grenades and three
submachine guns two conspirators itt
submits to White House an 18-point plan
designed to assure that agenda does not
get through the crucial next six months
the ITT proposal is rejected October
1440 committee approves sixty thousand
dollars for ambassador Cory's proposal
to purchase a radio station the money is
never spent october twenty second after
two unsuccessful abduction attempts on
october 19 and 20 a third attempt to
kidnap chilean army general brenna
schneider results in his being fatally
shot october 24th the chilean congress
votes 153 to 35 in favor of agenda /
alexander ii November third agenda is
formally ignited President of Chile
November 13th 40 committee approves
$25,000 for support of Christian
Democratic candidates november
nineteenth phony committee approves 725
thousand dollars for a covered action
program in chile approval is later
superseded by january 28 1971
authorization december 21st president
agenda proposes a constitutional
amendment establishing state control of
the large mind and authorizing
expropriation of all foreign firms
working them 1971 january 2840 committee
approves 1 million two hundred and forty
thousand dollars for the purchase of
radio stations and newspapers and to
support municipal candidates and other
political activities
of anti agenda parties februari 25th in
his annual state of the world message
President Nixon state we are prepared to
have the kind of relationship with the
Chilean government that it is prepared
to have with us March 22nd 40 committee
approved 185 thousand dollars additional
support for the Christian Democratic
Party PDC April fourth agendas popular
unity coalition Gunners 49.7 percent of
the vote in 218 municipal elections May
tenth 40 committee approves 77 thousand
dollars for purchase of a press for the
Christian Democratic Party newspaper the
press is not obtained and the funds are
used to support the paper main twentieth
40 committee approves $100,000 for
emergency aid to the Christian
Democratic Party to meet short-term debt
may 26th 40 committee approves 150
thousand dollars for additional a to
Christian Democratic Party to meet depth
July sixth 40 committee approves 150
thousand dollars for support of
opposition candidates in a Chilean
by-election July eleventh in a joint
session of the Chilean Congress a
constitutional amendment it's unah
nonnamous Lee approved permitting the
nationalization of the copper industry
the amendment provides for compensation
to copper companies within thirty years
at not less than three percent interest
Angus eleventh the export-import bank
denies a Chilean request for 21 million
dollars in loans and loan guarantees
needed to purchase three jets for the
national LA and Chile airline September
ninth 40 committee approves seven
hundred thousand dollars for support to
the major Santiago newspaper and
mercurio September 28th president agenda
announces that excess profits will be
deducted from compensation to be paid to
nationalize copper companies
September 29 the Chilean government
assumes operation of the Chilean
telephone company title co itt had owned
seventy percent interest in the company
since nineteen thirty September 29
nethanel Davis replaces Edward quarry as
US ambassador to chilly November fifth
40 committee approves a hundred and
fifteen thousand dollars support to
opposition parties and to induce a split
in the popular unity coalition December
first the Christian Democratic and
national parties organized the march of
the empty pot by women to protest food
shortages December 15th 40 committee
approves 160 thousand dollars to support
to opposition candidate in january
nineteen seventy two by-elections 1972
January nineteenth President Nixon
issues a statement to clarify US policy
toward forming expropriation of American
interest the president states that the
United States expects compensation to be
prompt adequate and effective the
president warns that shoot compensation
of be reasonable new bilateral economic
aid to the expropriating country might
be terminated and the US would withhold
its support from loans under the
consideration of multilateral
Development Bank's april eleventh 40
committee approves nine hundred and
sixty-five thousand dollars for
additional support to el mercurio april
twenty fourth pony committee approves
fifty thousand dollars for an effort to
splinter the popular unity coalition
may12 president agenda submits a
constitutional amendment to the chilean
congress for the expropriation of the
ITT's holding in the chilean telephone
company june sixteenth 40 committee
approves 46 thousand and five hundred
dollars to support a candidate in the
chilean by-election angus 21st addenda
declares a state of emergency in
santiago province after violence grows
out of a
one-day strike by most of the Capitals
shopkeepers September 21st 40 committee
approves twenty-four thousand dollars to
support an anti agenda businessman
organization October tenth the
Confederation of truck owners calls a
nationwide strike October 26th 40
committee approves 1 million four
hundred and twenty-seven thousand six
hundred and sixty six dollars to support
opposition political parties and private
sector organizations in anticipation of
March 1973 congressional elections
December fourth speaking before the
General Assembly of the United Nations
president again the charges that Chile
had been the victim of serious
aggression and add we have felt the
effects of a large-scale external
pressure against us 1973 februari 1240
committee approves two hundred thousand
dollars to support opposition political
parties in the congressional elections
march forth in the congressional
elections agendas popular unity
coalition 43.4 percent of the vote march
22nd talks between the US and chili on
political and financial problems and in
an impasse june fifth chillin suspend
its foreign shipments of copper as
miners strikers continue June twentieth
found signs of physicians teachers and
students go on a strike to protest
agendas handling of the 63 day copper
workers strike June twenty-first gun
fire bombings and fighting erupted as
government opponents and supporters
carry out a massive strike the
opposition newspaper El Mercurio is
closed by a court order for six days
following a government charge that had
incited subversion the following day an
appeals court invalidates the closure
order jun 29 rebel forces seized control
of the downtown area of santiago and
attack the defense ministry and the
presidential palace with
or troops loyal to the government
surround them and force them to
surrender this is the first military
attempt to overthrow an elected Chilean
government in 42 years july 26th truck
owners throughout chile go on strike
Angus second the owners of more than
110,000 buses and taxis go on a strike
Angus 20th 40 committee approves 1
million dollars to support opposition
political parties and private sector
organizations this money is not spent
angus 23rd general Carlos Prats Gonzalez
resigned as agendas defense minister an
army commander General Pinochet Ugarte
is named army commander on anchors 24th
Pratt resignation is interpreted as a
severe blow to agenda agus 27th Chile's
shop owners called another
anti-government strike September fourth
and estimated 100,000 supporters of
agendas government marched in the
streets of Santiago to celebrate the
third anniversary of his election the
Confederation of personal employees
begins an indefinite work stoppage
September 11th the Chilean military
overthrows the government of Salvador
Allende addenda dies during the takeover
reportedly by suicide September 13th the
new military government names army
commander pina Chet president and
assaults Congress september-october the
junta declares all Marxist political
parties illegal and places all other
parties in indefinite recess press
censorship is established as our
detention facilities for opponents of
the new regime thousands of casualties
are reported including summary
executions October 15th 40 committee
approves 34 thousand dollars for an anti
agenda radio station and travel costs of
pro hunter spokesman 1974 june
twenty-fourth 40 committee approves
fifty thousand dollars for
political commitments made to the
christian democratic party before the
coop September 16th President Ford
acknowledged cover operations in chilly
October 25th the inter-american
commission of human rights of the OAS
reports grievous violation of human
rights in Chile December 30 US military
aid is cut off 1975 June twentieth
peanut read declares there will be no
elections in Chile during my lifetime
nor in the lifetime of Mike successor
july 4th chilla refuses to allow the UN
Commission on Human Rights to enter the
country October 7th the UN Commission on
Human Rights report with profound
discussed the use of torture as a matter
of policy and other serious violations
of human rights in chilling portions of
the above chronology of events in Chile
were instructed from chronologies
prepared that by congressional research
service Chile nineteen sixty to seventy
a chronology chillness is the election
of Salvador Allende a chronology
development in Chile March 1973 to the
overthrow of the agenda government and
from material contained in the June
twenty-first 1973 report of the Senate
Foreign Relations Subcommittee on
multinational corporations entitled itt
and Chile